So to understand how
the internet actually works,
we need to look at the protocols and
the OSI model,
Open Systems Interconnection model,
that it is based on.
The OSI model that is on
the left is a conceptual model
that has been used in many communication
networks, including cell phones,
the telephony, and many other
experimental networks in between.
The one on the right is
the realization of the Internet.
The TCP/IP, the Internet model,
you have an application layer,
a transport layer, the Internet layer,
and the network access layer.
The reason for
doing this modular design is
each aspect of the system
can evolve independently.
And there are seven layers in the OSI
model, but the internet uses only four.
So the network topology is the data from
Host A gets to Host B
through multiple routers.
And the applications on both
sides talk to each other and
the information actually flows from
the application down the transport layer,
internet, link layer and
back to the routers and traces its path.
Until it traverses back
from the link layer,
internet, transport, and the application.
So this is all people typically show,
the protocol stack between two hosts.
The one thing I want to highlight
here is the A and
B need not be based on the Internet.
You can have a gateway module and you can
have a network of heterogeneous networks.
In this picture,
one of the routers actually talks
Internet and some other protocol.
Let's call it XYZ.
And it takes the internet messages,
and translates to XYZ.
And that is a gateway.
This way you have between the two
applications, seamless connectivity.
And the two, so
the way this works is a concept
called data encapsulation.
So the user data, which is some text or
files that you need to transfer for FTP,
it gets an application header, and
then it goes to the TCP layer.
We will look at TCP in a minute,
Transmission Control Protocol.
And then it goes to the IP layer.
So as it goes down the layer
to the physical medium,
every layer in the OSI model
keeps adding the header
information ahead of what
it has already received.
And this picture shows the Ethernet, but
in a cellular connection, CDMA, GSM,
you would have different headers
that get added to the IP datagram.
The IP protocol itself,
it's called RFC 791.
You can look it up on the Internet and
you will see this.
There are, so I said the data can be
broken into small pieces and sent.
So the Fragment Offset tells
where that particular piece
of data fits in the big picture
of the file or the user message.
And each IP packet has a source
address and a destination address.
And then there is a checksum that it
uses to check the sanity of the data,
to see if it got corrupted along the way.
And on top of IP sits TCP, which is
the Transmission Control Protocol.
This, incidentally, if this is all too
complex, it is, don't worry about it.
I just wanted to highlight
the various fields
that are there in these packets to
give you an idea of how it all works.
So in the TCP,
one of the fields is a sequence number.
And there is an acknowledgement number.
And TCP sits on the IP.
And this is how it provides reliability.
TCP is a connection-oriented protocol and
it looks at the missing pieces and
keeps asking for
retransmissions until it gets
the complete message at the destination.